Weaving with Viapoa Transcript:

This oral history captures a weaving session on Tuvalu’s capital island, where Viapoa and her family graciously shared their knowledge of traditional fan weaving. As they demonstrated the process, stories and laughter unfolded—touching on everyday life, colonial legacies, and generational teachings. The fan made by Van’s mother became a point of light-hearted rivalry, between her and the colonial cooling  ac, but what these joke reveals is how the introduction of these western technologies impact tradition on cause eraser.

Clip 1
Van: Compared to other island fans, you can also see other island fans. Some of them are very beautiful as well.

Sissie: How do you dye the color?

Van: the color? (Van and viapoa discuss color in Tuvaluan) They use a not of local materials.. Okay, color.

Van: These the ones brought from the shop.

Alice: Oh, okay, I can see. 

Clip 3
Alice: do you mix with the color, and then they you paint on it? Something like that?

Van:  Uhhh, pause (discuss with viapoa color process in Tuvaluan)

Viapoa: (gesturing process) I get color

Van: They put the water, and then they put the car inside, then they mix it

Van: they mix it 

Viapoa: for 10 mins

Van: And then what? Where do you go from there (asking viapoa)
And then they put the leaves inside.

Viapoa: Maybe leaves. You can tie like that to make them small ones. Then you get inside the box, small box like that. (showing process) Then you get inside the box, a small box like that.




Clip 4

Van:You know, okay, you can spend one day, one day, if you really committed to doing it,

Van: but you don't have any other things to do. You just focus on it But if not, it takes three, four days, one week.

Nya: Wow

Van: It also depends on how good you are, if you're really good, fast. 

Clip 5 + 6

* Vans wife enters room

Viapoa: This one, wife (holds up and fan done by vans wife and points to her)

Nya: Who  teaches her?, did she teach? 

Van: She taught her (points to mother)

Nya: Is it very popular for, umm, to pass down the process?

Van: Yea yes, yes it is. Pass down to the young generation.

* Van and vipoa: Having side conversation in Tuvaluan

Van: But the fans are different from fand all over the island

Ciip 6 + 7

Viapoa: You can have this, five each. Five, five, five, twenty. (showing team how many pieces per section of handle of fan)

Alice: Oh I see,i see. Thats how you calculate the

* Viapoa speakers in tuvalan with van

Van: So how long you be here for?

Group: Until Saturday.

Clip 8

Nya: Can you ask her?… 
Van: Yea, You can ask any question you like.
Nya: who who taught her how to do this?
* Van turns to viapoa asking her in Tuvalan who taught her 
Van: from other women
Viapoa: from island (echos van explaining she learned from island women)
Sissie: How did you guys move on the island? 
Van: How we move here? Normally, normally we're supposed to only the those who are working here. (Hey, come here. Come here. Speaking to his child who is playing behind us) So, so we are working here. That's why we are here. This is the capitol yea, capitol island 
Sissie: This  is totally like live differently, right? like you had different life over there?(other island)
Van: Yea, yea
Van: rural life, and urban life
Sissie: which one you like better? 
Van: Yea both, both 
* Viapoa continues showing the process of splitting leaves
Alice: Can I ask, so you just take leaves from coconut trees outside? 
Van: Yes
Clip 9
* Viapo speaks with daughter-in-law in Tuvaluan as she continues to show us the weaving pattern.
Viapoa: One, two, three, four, five.(showing how many pieces to gather for the next section of the weaving pattern
Clip 10
* Viapoa continues speaking in Tuvaluan with daughter.
00:03
I think I'm not that I'm not that oil.
00:07
Nya: We were at the women’s center, and they were telling us that a lot of youth are not interested sometimes… 
Van: A lot of?...
Nya: Youth, you young people, sometimes they're not interested, So is, is that something that they're still interested in doing, or?
Van: Yea, they're interested in doing this very much?
Nya: Okay, that's good.
00:32
Van: If they don't have anything to do, they will do that.
Nya: Yea
* Viapoa speaks to van in Tuvaluan



























Van: compared to other islands fans but you can also see other island fans. It’s

Some of them are beautiful as well. 

Sissie: How do you dye the color? 

* viapoa understanding the question begins translating  to  van)  

Van: The Color? They use not the local material color. They use the one, th one  brought from the shop. 

Alice: Oh, okay I see. 

Van: The pattern of ahhh (stops  mid sentenc  to consult with viapoa)

* Vipoa starts showing us collection of colors and pigments
Viposa: Seew the color, It's a pink, yellow, if you want green, green

Van: I think the color is... 

Alice: To mix with the color and then repaint on it? Is it something like that?

Van: uhhhh  (ask viapua in tuvalan to  explain pigment color process  putting on.)

Vipoa  translates in tuvalan:

Van:  They pour the water and then they put the color inside, they  mix  it

Nya: right

Van: uhh and then what? What to  do from their (looks to vipoa and ask her in english). 

Van: And then  they  then they put the leaves inside.

Vipoa: and then the leaves you can take like that to be a small one  (wraps coconnut  leaves around  knukles too shorten the lenth) and then you take a pot, small pot   like tha(gestures the size of pot  needed for to put leaves for drying)

Researchers ask how long it takes

Van: okay you can  spend  ummm

Vipoa  finish vans sentence as he word finds

Vipoa: one day

Van: One day, if  youre really  committed, like you  don have anything to do you just focus  on it, but if not it take two, four days, onne week

Nya: wow

Van: it also depends  on how  good you are

Sissie: Yea

Alice: I see

Van: if  youre really good,  fast




Van: So that one was made by my wife. That's my wife there. 

Nya , Alice, Sissie: Oh, hi. Hi. Hi. 

*  vans wife shy waves  hello, room erupts into  coi laugher as we notice her  shyness and she  notice  ours

Vans wife: This one, holds  up a  head band she made

Van:  She's just a new uhh,

Vipoa:  His wife teach(signinaling she was   the onn who taught his wife)

Alice: A new maker. 

Van: Just still learning of how to do it.

Nya: Who teach her? 

Van: So, yeah. So that's my mom. Yeah. 

Nya: Did she teach, she taught

Van: She taught your wife? 

Nya: Wow. 

Nya: Is it very popular to pass down like the process? 

Van: Yes, yes, yes. Pass down from the young generation. 

* Vipoa and van  speaking   in tuvalen 

Van: But the fans different from different islands

So  you travel all the way from New York?

New Clip:

Vipoa: you can have this.(shows the process of sploiiting on leaf into  multiple layers

van: So they just make a few and then they sell it. 

Vipoa: Five each. Five another. Like this.(picks up finished piece to show us finished pattern)  5, 5, , 20. 

Alice: Oh, I see, I see. That's how you calculate it.(explaing to the group)

Sissie(piks up example  compled fan) ooohhh

* Vipoa speaking in tuvalen extends voice in conversation to reach daughter in law across the room

Van: So how long will you be here for? 

Sissie: Till Saturday. Till Saturday. 

Nya: Can you ask? 
Van: yea you can ask any question you like

Nya: Who taught her how to do this? 

* Starts speaking tuvalen, assuming hes asking her the question assuming viapoa responds in tuvalan, they exchange questions and asnwes

Van: From where the women? 

Vipoa: from Island. 

van:Normally, we're supposed to... Only those who are working are here. Hey, hey, hey, come here, come here. So, we are working here, that's why we are here. This is capital, right? Capital island, yeah? This is totally like live differently. Like you have a different life over there. Rural life and urban life. Which one do you like better? Both. Can I ask, so you just take the leaves from the coconut tree outside? Yes. Where do you get the leaves from? Normally, we get the leaves from the coconut tree. you say a hockey normally one two three four five We were at the women's center, and they were telling us that a lot of youth are not interested sometimes in... Youth? Young people? Sometimes they're not interested, so is that something that they're still interested in doing? Yeah, they're interested in doing this very much. Oh, okay, that's good. If they don't have anything to do, they will do that. If you cannot use this spray, you can make it like this. To pear. Pear. Should I split it? Yeah, yeah. Can make it like this too. One leaf. If you can make like this. Two color. Two color, oh. like this okay but all here okay this it's cannot like that see you and you like this now one side all this i see i see yeah that's you can make it like this The other five, too, also the same. Same color. Okay? White one, green, pink with yellow. One, two, three, four, five. Yes. So that's one bath. Yes. How young are they usually? Oh, so they're not young? Yes. Okay. That's two now. Put the camera down. So, like this. Fair. Green. Green, okay. Green. Orange. Pink. And white. So you can tie it again. You can do it. You take that, too. So... Put like this, another one. You can... Okay? You can pick up another one. Also two. The other side, one. Like this, another. Take this pair. Take it. Right? Two, two. White. Green. Green one. Green one. Oh, wrong. Two. Take it pink. Two. We can take some.
